# COFpaper_lipidomics-metabolomics-transcriptomics-multi-omics
**Abstract**

*Background/aim:* Low birth weight (LBW) is a risk factor of developing type 2 diabetes (T2D). We hypothesized that 4 weeks of carbohydrate overfeeding (COF) would unmask dysmetabolic traits among 22 non-obese early middle-aged LBW men, including 5 with screen detected non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), compared with 21 healthy normal birth weight (NBW) controls. 

*Methods:* Fasting hepatic fat content (HFC; MR spectroscopy), hepatic glucose production (HGP; deuterium glucose), insulin resistance (HIR), energy expenditure (EE; indirect calorimetry), selected biomarkers (multiplex ELISA), serum metabolomics and lipidomics (mass-spectrometry), subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) histology (immunohistochemistry), and SAT transcriptomics (RNAseq), was measured before and after 4 weeks COF (+25% energy).
 
*Results:* Fasting plasma glucose, C-peptide, HOMA-IR, HIR, and EE increased more in response to COF in LBW, including those without NAFLD (n=17), compared to NBW men (all P<0.05). No statistical significant differences between groups of incremental responses to COF of body weight, body fat mass (BFM), or HFC was observed. However, BFM increased during COF only in NBW controls (P=0.01), and relative HFC tended to increase more during COF in LBW (25%) compared with NBW (11%) subjects. Plasma adiponectin was lower in LBW, and together with leptin and FGF21 increased after COF only in LBW subjects. Serum levels of alanine, as well as phosphatidylcholines (PC) and triglycerides (TG) with shorter chain lengths and fewer double-bonds, increased more in LBW compared to NBW subjects in response to COF (all P<0.05). SAT cell size increased after COF in both groups (P<0.05). Adipocyte density (cells per area) was significantly lower in LBW at baseline (P<0.01) and decreased after COF only in NBW subjects (P=0.02). RNAseq differential expression analysis demonstrated reduced ELOVL6, combined with increased ACTG2 and CH25H SAT gene expressions, in LBW in response to COF as compared to NBW subjects (P<0.05, -1>log2FC>1). LBW but not NBW subjects, decreased expression of genes involved in collagen and extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation (MMP7, MMP9, MMP12) after COF, whereas LBW without NAFLD subjects increased expression of genes involved in collagen and ECM formation (ADAMTS14, COL1A1, COL11A) after COF. Finally, integrated multi-omics bioinformatical analyses indicated  reduced PPAR-gamma signaling  in LBW subjects. 

*Conclusion:* LBW subjects even without NAFLD are more sensitive to the deleterious effects of carbohydrate overfeeding. Reduced  PPAR-gamma signaling, as well as increased collagen and ECM formation, may contribute to impaired SAT expandability, increased EE, ectopic fat deposition, hepatic insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and eventually T2D, in LBW subjects exposed to carbohydrate overfeeding.   

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
The code include analysis of the three omics layers (metabolomics, lipidomics, RNA-seq) and the multi-omics integration
